


2



Surrealism and Postcolonialism in the Americas 

Introduction 


   Surrealism, an artistic and cultural movement that originated in Europe in the 1920s, was founded in Paris in 1924 by a group of artists and writers who endeavoured to challenge the traditional values of Western culture and society. Surrealism profoundly impacted art, literature, and culture, and its influence can be seen throughout various heterogeneous and different fields, including fashion, philosophy and politics. While scholars have primarily examined Surrealism in the context of European cultural and artistic history, recent scholarship has begun to explore how Surrealism can also be understood as a post-colonial movement. Postcolonialism refers to theoretical and critical approaches that emerged during and after colonialism. The concept "postcolonial", as we will see, refers not only to the period after colonialism but also refers to the ongoing impact of colonialism on culture, society, and politics. Postcolonialism seeks to understand how colonialism has shaped the world and to challenge the dominant narratives and structures that emerged from colonialism. This essay will explore how Surrealism can be understood as postcolonial. After defining postcolonialism, I will emphasize surrealists' involvement in anti-imperialist and anti-colonial politics by focusing on Andre Breton since he is considered the theoretical founder of the movement and because he sought to theoretically and practically align Surrealism with revolutionary political purposes. Although an anti-colonial spirit was present in the foundation of Surrealism, Surrealism can be better described as postcolonial if we examine the non-Western context in which Surrealism was realized. That is because certain artistic practices exercised by the founding members of the surrealism group, such as collecting artefacts from the colonies, are strongly reminiscent of colonial practices. By considering the works of Aime Césaire and Wifredo Lam, I will conclude that Surrealism can be described as postcolonial as far as we consider the edges of movement, meaning its non-Western manifestations. 









Defining postcolonialism 


   The terms ''postcolonial'' and ''postcolonialism'' have attracted much discussion and quarrel among scholars who commonly use them in contrary and confusing ways. Indeed, scholars and critics often cannot agree on how to spell postcolonialism: Should it be spelt with the hyphen (as in post-colonialism) or without it? Following McLeod, there is a particular reason for the spelling ambiguity, which concerns the different meanings we might attribute to the terms ''post-colonial'' and 'postcolonial'. The hyphenated term 'post-colonial 'is better apt to signify a particular historical period or epoch, similar to phrases such as 'after colonialism' or 'after the end of the Empire' (McLeod, 2010). It names something which exists in the world. However, the term 'postcolonial' is better conceptualized not in terms of strict historical or empirical periodization but as designating disparate forms of representation, reading practices, artistic attitudes and values(McLeod, 2010). These principally aesthetic phenomena can spread across the historical border between colonization and the fall of colonial empires through national independence. In other words, ''postcolonialism'' does not refer to something which tangibly is, but rather it denotes something which one does: it can describe a way of thinking, a mode of perception, a line of enquiry, an aesthetic practice, a method of investigation''(McLeod, 2010). Hence, ''postcolonialism'', without the hyphen, is better conceived as a term which describes the particular qualities of a thing or an action. The term ''postcolonial'' names an historically grounded and transformative approach, way of thinking or  artistic attitude. Thus, I will use the terms ''postcolonial'' and ''postcolonialism'' in this essay. 



Surrealism's anti-imperialist and anti-colonial position 

  Revolutionary, anti-imperialist and anti-colonial positions were already present in much of the foundational surrealist discourse that emerged in France and within the original intentions of the Surrealism movement were both the opposition to Western imperialism and nationalism in the West. Even if colonialism is not situated at the center of the two ''Manifestoes of Surrealism'', their pamphlets, letters,and declarations are the best testimony of their anti-colonial mentality. Their revolutionary and anti-colonial ideological positions were daringly proclaimed and then enacted throughout much of the 20th century. On July 1, 1925, for example, one of the official and founding declarations of the surrealist movement- a public letter condemning Pual Claudel, the French Ambassador to Japan- insisted on the categorical anti-imperialist commitment of Surrealism. To quote:

''We fervently hope that wars and colonial insurrection will annihilate this Western civilization whose vermin you protect in the East, and we appeal to this destruction as the state of affairs least unacceptable to the mind….We take this opportunity to dissociate ourselves publicly from all that is French, in action and in words.''
  Maxime Alexandre, Louis Aragon, Antonin Artaud, André Breton, et.al., "An Open Letter M. Paul Claudel, French Ambassador to Japan" (Paris, July 1, 1925), reprinted in Maurice Nadeau, op. cit., 238- 239

 
                                                                                                              (Alexandre et.al, 1925, p.238-39) 


    In 1931, the Surrealists led by Andre Breton curated a small exhibition called "The Truth about the Colonies," along with a pamphlet named "First Report on the Colonial Exhibition". The Surrealist-curated exhibition was set against the French Colonial Exhibition that was happening at the time,  the purpose of which was to campaign the ideals of the French colonial empire. As Adam Jolles notes ''The Truth about the Colonies'' was constructed around the premise that the International Colonial exhibition presented a false and distorted picture of the current situation of the colonies'' (Jolles, 2013). The "Truth about the Colonies" exhibition was aimed at refuting the political assumptions of the ''Colonial Exhibition'' showing in Paris in 1931; and challenged the dominant narratives of colonialism, which portrayed itself as a civilizing mission. 

   Another historical paradigm of the anti-colonial commitment of the surrealist can be found a few years later when Andre Breton and his fellowship, after escaping the nearing Nazi occupation of France, disembarked in Haiti in 1945. In Haiti, Breton helped to ignite an insurgency that led to the fall of the US-backed dictator Élie Lescot. In an interview with René Bélance, a Haitian poet, Breton clarified that:

''Surrealism is allied with people of color, first because it has sided with them against all forms of imperialism and white brigandage, as is well demonstrated by the public manifestos against the Moroccan War, against the colonial exhibition, and so forth, and, secondly, because of the profound affinities between Surrealism and 'primitive thought.''
 Réne Bélance, "An Interview with André Breton"(1945), What is Surrealism? ed. Franklin Rosemont (New York: Pathfinder Books, 1978), 256

   Furthermore, while talking to the young Haitians shortly after, Breton asserted that:

 ''It is therefore no accident, but a sign of the times, that the greatest impulses towards new paths for Surrealism have been furnished during the war that just ended, by my greatest friend of 'color'—Aimé Césaire in poetry and Wifredo Lam in painting…''
 André Breton, "A Speech to Young Haitian Poets" (1945), What is Surrealism?ed. Franklin Rosemont (New York: Pathfinder Books, 1978), 260.




Bibliography(in APA 6th) :

-Antle, M., & Conley, K. (2015). Introduction: Dada, Surrealism, and colonialism. South Central Review, 32(1), 1-7. doi:10.1353/scr.2015.0002

-Alexandre, M., Aragon, L., Artaud, A., & Breton, A., et.al, (1925). An Open Letter to M. Paul Claudel, French Ambassador to Japan. Paris.

-Baackman, S., & Craven, D. (2009). Surrealism and Post-Colonial Latin America Introduction. Journal of Surrealism and the Americas, 3(2).

-Breton, A. (1978). What is Surrealism?: Selected writings (F. Rosemont, Ed.). New York, NY: Pathfinder Books.

-Clark, M. A. (2007). Santería: Correcting the myths and uncovering the realities of a growing religion. Westport, CT: Praeger.

-Conley, K. (2017). Collecting ghostly things: André Breton and Joseph Cornell. Modernism/modernity, 24(2), 263-282. doi:10.1353/mod.2017.0021

-Césaire, A. (2001). Notebook of a return to the native land. (C. Eshleman & A. Smith, Trans.). Middletown, CT: Wesleyan University Press. 

-Fouchet, M. (1976). Wifredo Lam. Barcelona: Ediciones Polígrafa.

-Jolles, A. (2013). Curatorial Avant-Garde: Surrealism and exhibition practice in France, 1925-1941. Pennsylvania: Pennsylvania State Univ. Press.

-Madison, J. (2006). MoMa Learning. Retrieved May 4, 2023, from https://www.moma.org/learn/moma_learning/wifredo-lam-the-jungle-1943/

-Mahabir, J. I. (2003). Miraculous weapons revolutionary ideology in Caribbean culture. New York: Peter Lang.

- McLeod, J. (2016). Beginning postcolonialism. Manchester U.K.: Manchester University Press.

--Rabbitt, K. M. (2023). Suzanne Cesaire's Surrealism: Tightrope of hope. In Surrealist Women's writing: A critical exploration (pp. 103-121). S.l.: Manchester University Press.

--Sato, P. (2016). Wifredo Lam, The Shango Priestess, and the Femme cheval. Journal of International Women's Studies, 17(3), 91-101. Retrieved from https://www.proquest.com/scholarly-journals/wifredo-lam-shango-priestess-femme-cheval/docview/1805721523/se-2

-Snyder, E. (1970). A Reading of Aimé Césaire's "Return to My Native Land." L'Esprit Créateur, 10(3), 197–212. Retrieved from  http://www.jstor.org/stable/26279591

-Williams, E. E. (2003). From Columbus to Castro the history of the Caribbean, 1492-1969. London:


  Therefore, throughout the history of the surrealist movement in the 20th century, regardless of the diverse and often competing ideological and political strains of Surrealism, anti-imperialism and anti-colonialism can be said to have been one constant political and ideological attribute of the movement
In the 1930s there were three different political tendencies inside the movement: those who were allied to the Soviet-based Communism and the French Communist Party led by Louis Aragon; those who became aligned with the Trotskyists and the Fourth International led by André Breton; and those who became non-aligned socialists or anarchists such as Georges Bataille ( Baackman & Craven,2009)
. 
   Be that as it may, while these ideological and political positions and their enactment were undoubtedly genuine and even inspiring to writers and artists in the Americas such as Aimé Césaire and Suzanne  Césaire in Martinique, Rémy Bélance in Haiti etc., they were contradicted by certain artistic attitudes that the surrealist enacted. The surrealist's deep fascination for non-Western objects, such as ceremonial objects from Africa, Oceania, the Caribbeans etc., that French colonialism and a new market for non-Western objects in the Americas made available to them, and which they collected and cherished as primal art, could be understood today as a standpoint of intellectual colonizing(Antle & Conley, 2015). One could say the surrealists remained caught between genuinely enacting their revolutionary political affiliations and fetishing or exoticizing the colonies by constructing a mythic Africa, Oceania or Caribbeans. For despite their attraction to non-European cultures, their numerous journeys around the globe and their occasional ethnographic investigation
As Adam Jolles notes, during the exhibition ''The Truth about the colonies'' in 1931, the surrealists temporarily abandoned artistic experimentation to indulge with ethnographic inquiry about the objects and art originating from the colonies (Jolles, 2013) 
, the fascination with the far-off lands relates more to myth than to true knowledge of different cultures established through dialogue. A paradigmatic case of this is Andre Breton's own artistic practice/attitude of collecting objects. Breton had a deep fascination about the objects he collected from around the globe. As Conley notes, he would rearrange his collection in his studio according to the principle of juxtaposition,a key surrealist technique,  in order for them to manifest to him their latent potencies (Conley, 2017). In a sense, for Breton, just like human psychology, objects would contain latentices, and since the object's previous life in their spiritual practices were repressed, they could be reincarnated as a part of an artistic collection. Although these objects facilitated Breton with imaginative travels to the places of origins of the objects in question, still this artistic attitude of collecting objects from the colonies can be seen as cultural appropriation.That is because cultural appropriation often involves taking objects out of their cultural and historical contexts. By doing so, Breton effectively erased the original meaning and purpose of these objects, reducing them to mere curiosities or aesthetic objects without regard for their original cultural significance. Therefore, certain artistic attitudes and practices that some surrealists enacted are strongly reminiscent of colonial practices, and can be argued to have perpetuated a colonial mentality. Which when taken into account, make it hard, if not implausible, to describe artistic attitude such as the above as postcolonial. 
   Recent scholarship on Surrealism shows that the most fertile exchanges and encounters between European surrealists and fellow artists abroad occurred not in France at the movement's geographic center, but at its edges (Antle & Conley, 2015). Hence, I think the most fertile ground to search for postcolonial manifestations of Surrealism is to be found in the edges of the movement, meaning the non-Western context of Surrealism. In what follows, I will focus on two surrealist artists, namely Aimé Césaire and Wilfredo Lam and examine why and how their work can be understood as postcolonial. 


Aimé Césaire

    Aimé Césaire, born in Martinique in 1913, was undoubtedly one the most successful associates of the surrealist movement in bringing together the methodology of surrealist poetry with a profound anti-colonial ideological and political position. In 1941 ,during World War II, he alongside Suzanne Césaire, an anti-colonial feminist scholar, activist and Surrealist, founded the literary review Tropiques. Tropiques was a literary magazine published in Martinique from 1941 to 1945 and other Martinican intellectuals of the era and other surrealists such as Breton contributed poetry, essays, and fiction to the magazine. It was through this magazine that writers reflected on colonialism, Surrealism and other topics while resisting the Vichy-supported government that dominated Martinique at the time (Rabbitt, 2023). Hence, Césaire was politically engaged in actions supporting the decolonization of French Colonies of Africa. 
  However, Césaire expressed his anti-colonial stance through his politics and through his art. The Notebook of a Return to the Native Land (1939) constitutes one of the most fully realized intersections between poetry and anti-colonial discourse of his time and deals with themes of colonialism, the struggle for political and cultural identities,and decolonization. Throughout the poem, Césaire reflects on his personal experiences growing up in Martinique, a French colony in the Caribbean, and explores the broader implications of colonialism for the people of the Caribbean and Africa. The poetic creed Césaire enunciates is deeply characteristic of surrealists poetry. Although, the structure and the content are more concrete and comprehensible than other surrealist poems, the reader is kept on the edge by the frequent changes in direction and tone together with the raw power of his language, which is highly emotional: 

Words?    while we handle quarters of earth,
            while we wed delirious continents, 
            while we force steaming gates, 
            words, ah yes, words! but words of fresh blood,...
                                                                                                        (Cesaire,2001, p.28) 
                                                                                 
   In a surrealistic fashion he proclaims a warning to the Western world, which can not be assured by the positivist tradition of its past, and that irrationality and madness will overthrow rationality (Snyder, 1970). The poet conceives madness as a liberating force and an antithesis to the rational bias of Western culture:

Because we hate you and your reason,     we claim kinship with 
dementia praecox with the flaming madness of persistent 
cannibalism 
                                                                                                        (Cesaire, 2001, p.22) 

   The opposition to Western civilization and the exposure of its impacts on the colonies is present throughout the poem. The poem challenges the dominant narratives of the West according to which their violence and exploitation was carried out in the name of progress and civilization, and highlights the environmental, societal and cultural destruction that resulted from colonialism. Césaire by juxtaposing  the present with the past, explodes the present through the past:

So much blood in my memory!    In my memory are lagoons. 
                They are covered with death's-heads. They are not covered with water lilies…

My memory is encircled with blood.    My memory has a belt of corpses! 
and machine gun fire of rum barrels brilliantly sprinkling our ignominious 
revolts,     amorous glances swooning from having swigged
 too much ferocious freedom 

                                                                                                         (Cesaire, 2001, p.29) 

   Lastly, the poem does not only indulge in criticism and opposition to Western colonialism, but also it is a call to action for decolonization and freedom:

standing under the stars 

            standing
                       and 
                                  free

and the lustral ship fearlessly advances on the crumbling water. 
And now our ignominious plops are rotting away!

                                                                                                         (Cesaire, 2001,p.54) 

   Although I have mentioned only a few verses from the ''Notebook of a Return to the Native Land'', still they are illustrative of the deep spirit of postcolonialism embodied in the work. Césaire through his surrealist poetry seeked to challenge the legacy of colonialism and to call for freedom and decolonization of  the colonies.





Wifredo Lam

 ''My painting is an act of decolonization'' - Wifredo Lam 

  
Amongst the surrealist painters, Wifredo Lam can be considered a postcolonial artist because his paintings reflect his experiences as a person of mixed African, Chinese, and European heritage. Born in Cuba, in 1902 during the colonial era, his work explores the themes of identity, cultural hybridity, and resistance to colonialism. It was through art that Wifredo Lam directly articulated his opposition to colonialism. One way in which Lam engages with postcolonial themes is through his use of imagery. His paintings often feature hybrid figures that blend human, animal, and plant elements, creating a sense of fluidity and transformation. These figures reflect Lam's interest in Afro-Caribbean religions and mythologies, as well as his belief in the power of art to challenge dominant cultural narratives shaped by colonialism (Sato, 2016). 
   This can be illustrated in one of his masterpieces, named The Jungle (1943). In 1943, Wifredo Lam was in the midst of reacquainting himself with his native Cuba, especially its population of African descent. As he once noted, ''I wanted with all my heart to paint the drama of my country, but by thoroughly expressing the black spirit, the beauty of the plastic art of the blacks'' (Fouchet, 1976, p. 188-89). In this work , Lam combines Afro-Cuban artistic and cultural traditions with the European modernist movements of Cubism and Surrealism to articulate through the visual language of the painting a resistance and opposition to colonialism. In the painting, the figures appear to emerge and amalgamate with a dense wall of vegetation made up of thick, banded stalks. This is highly suggestive of the sugarcanes that grew in the fields of Cuba and where the colonized people that were enslaved used to work. The Africans, who were enslaved by traders from Spain and Portugal and brought to Cuba to work its sugarcane fields, were coerced to give up their native religious beliefs and convert to Catholicism (Madison, 2006). Following this, they camouflaged their own traditions onto Catholicism (Santería) ,while continuing to practice their religions, such as Voodoun, secretly in hidden places such as the jungle that Lam depicts in this painting(Clark,2007)(Madison, 2006). The part-human, part-animal figures with exaggerated limbs that stand close to each other in the painting also remind us of African masks. In Cubism fashion, the geometrical bodies are fragmented into individual parts that do not appear to logically fit together. In a Surrealist fashion, with their fantastic appearance, they seem as if they could have materialized from the artist's dreams or perhaps from his unconscious. Furthermore, in the right upper corner of the painting a pair of scissors is visible. The meaning of the scissors can be described by quoting Lam himself  "In The Jungle the revenge of a small Caribbean country, Cuba, against the colonizers is plotted. I used the scissors as a symbol of a necessary cut against foreign imposition in Cuba, against all colonization'''(Mahabir, 2003). The foreign imposition that Lam notes refers to the racist policies that the U.S  had tried to impose on the island as it occupied Cuba militarily from 1899 to 1902; and it would continue to wield power over Cuban affairs until the Cuban Revolution in 1959  making it an American colony (Sato, 2016)(Williams, 2003). Thus, The Jungle (1943) is one Lam's work where he engages with postcolonial themes such as identity, cultural hybridity, and colonialism. Through his imagery Lam challenges dominant cultural narratives shaped by colonialism and critiques the impacts of Western civilization on their colonies. 


Conclusion

To conclude, anti-imperialism and anti-colonialism was one of the original political intentions in the foundation of the movement and it can be said to have been a constant ideological attribute of Surrealism given its many political disparities. Although on many occasions the surrealists genuinely enacted their revolutionary political ideals, their appetite for objects they collected from different parts of the world that had been colonized and that were available to them because of colonization makes it hard to describe them as genuinely postcolonial. Regardless of the quasi-contradictory relationship that some surrealists had with colonialism, their revolutionary ideals and anti-establishment poetry, art and politics indeed inspired young revolutionaries outside of Europe. Such is the case with Aime Cesaire and Wilfredo Lam that though their politics and art were able to translate their anti-colonial position fully in textual and visual language. Their ability to articulate a direct and open critique of colonialism through their art renders them truly postcolonial manifestations of the surrealists movement. 



Endnotes 